[[!meta title="Onboarding info for new Sysadmins"]]
[[!meta robots="noindex"]]

[[!toc levels=1]]

<a id="important-repositories"></a>

# Important repositories

We have a [meta-repository](https://gitlab.tails.boum.org/sysadmin-team/repos)
that documents all important repositories. During the onboarding process, you
should receive a signed copy of the `known_hosts` file in that repository to
bootstrap trust on those SSH server.

# Documentation

See our [[role description|/contribute/working_together/roles/sysadmins]] as it
gives insight on the way we currently organize. Check the pages linked from
there for info about services and some important pages in GitLab which we need
to keep an eye on.

Besides that, we also have documentation in the [sysadmin-private](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/tails/sysadmin-private)
repository:

- This is an encrypted repository: you need to have `git-remote-crypt`
  installed before cloning it AND run some commands from the `README` as soon
  as you clone it.

- It contains emergency contacts, doc on some of our proceses, meeting notes,
  and info about machines and upstream providers.

# GitLab

Sysadmin issues are tracked in [Torproject's Gitlab](https://gitlab.torproject.org/tpo/tpa/tails/sysadmin/-/issues)

# Monitoring

We use Icinga2 with the
[Icingaweb2](https://icingaweb2.tails.boum.org/icingaweb2) web interface. The
shared passphrase can be found in the Password Store (see the [Important
repositories](#important-repositories) section).

```
pass tails-sysadmins/services/icingaweb2.tails.boum.org/icingaadmin
```

# SSH access

Once you have confirmed the `known_hosts` file (see the [Important
repositories](#important-repositories) section), you can fetch a list of all
hosts from the Puppet Server:

```
ssh -p 3005 lizard.tails.net sudo puppetserver ca list --all
```

You can also fetch SSH fingerprints for know hosts:

```
mkdir -p ~/.ssh/tails
scp -P 3005 lizard.tails.net:/etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts ~/.ssh/tails/known_hosts
```

An example SSH config file can be seen in
`sysadmin-private.git:systems/ssh_config`.

All public systems are reachable via the `tails.net` namespace and, once
inside, all private VMs are accessible via their hostnames and FQDNs. TCP
forwaring works so you can use any public system as a jumphost.

Physical servers and VMs hosted by third-parties have OOB access, and such
instructions can be found in `sysadmin-private.git:systems/`.


# Mailing lists

We currently use the following mailing lists:

- `sysadmins at tails.net`, a Schleuder list used for:
  - accounts in external services
  - communication with upstream providers
  - general requests (eg. GitLab accounts, occasional bug reports)
  - cron reports which eventually need acting upon
- `tails-notifications at lists.puscii.nl`, used for Icinga2 notifications
