[[!meta title="Converting dangerous documents to safe PDFs using Dangerzone"]]

When you receive untrusted documents, for example, email attachments,
*[Dangerzone](https://dangerzone.rocks/)* allows you to convert them into safe
PDFs before opening.

*Dangerzone* is particularly useful for journalists who might receive dangerous
documents from anonymous sources or download them from the Internet.

<div class="tip">

<p><i>Dangerzone</i> is created by <a href="https://freedom.press/">Freedom of
the Press Foundation</a>, a non-profit that protects public-interest
journalism. Edward Snowden and Laura Poitras are in its Board of Directors.</p>

</div>

You can install *Dangerzone* in Tails as [[additional
software||additional_software]].

We are not including *Dangerzone* in Tails only because it would be too big
(over 1 GB), but we highly recommend it.

Learn more about [how *Dangerzone* works](https://dangerzone.rocks/about.html).

[[!toc levels=2]]

Supported formats
=================

*Dangerzone* works on many file formats, including:

- PDFs

- *Microsoft Office* documents, such as .docx, .xlsx, and .pptx

- *LibreOffice* documents, such as .odt and .ods

- Images, such as .jpg, .gif, .svg, .tiff, and .png

- EPUB ebooks

Differences between *Dangerzone* and *Metadata Cleaner*
=======================================================

Tails also includes [[*Metadata Cleaner*|doc/sensitive_documents/metadata]] to
clean files, but the use cases for *Dangerzone* and *Metadata Cleaner* are very
different.

We recommend that you use:

- *Metadata Cleaner* to [[remove metadata from your files]] before you publish
  or share them.

- *Dangerzone* to sanitize untrusted documents shared with you by others.

<table>
<tr><th></th><th class="w30"><span class="application">Dangerzone</span></th><th class="w30"><span class="application">Metadata Cleaner</span></th></tr>
<tr><td>Safe to use on</td><td>Other people's files</td><td>Your files only</td></tr>
<tr><td>Clean audio and video files</td><td class="cross">No</td><td class="check">Yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Clean images embedded in office documents</td><td class="check"><span class="check">Yes</span></td><td class="cross">No</td></tr>
<tr><td>Clean visual metadata and fingerprints ¹</td><td class="cross">No</td><td class="cross">No</td></tr>
<tr><td>Allow selecting text in generated PDFs</td><td class="check">Yes</td><td class="cross">No</td></tr>
<tr><td>Speed</td><td class="cross">Slower</td><td class="check">Faster</td></tr>
<tr><td>Included in Tails by default</td><td class="cross">No</td><td class="check">Yes</td></tr>
</table>

1. For example [[!wikipedia Machine Identification Code desc="printer tracking
dots"]], printing imperfections, or intentional misspellings

System requirements
===================

*Dangerzone* requires a lot of memory in the computer and space in your
Persistent Storage because it relies on [[!wikipedia Containerization
(computing) desc="software containers"]] to manipulate dangerous files
securely.

To install *Dangerzone*, you need at least:

- 8 GB of RAM

- 12 GB available in the Persistent Storage

# Procedure

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Enable Additional Software feature.

   > Additional Software is enabled by default since Tails 5.0. ([[!tails_mr 800]])
   >
   > When I restart a Tails 6.3 with [[!tails_gitweb_commit 33eeda92533]] on top:
   >
   >  - The Additional Software feature gets disabled with `The data of this feature is still saved`.
   >  - The configuration in `persistence.conf` is not changed to include `sources.lists.d`.
   >  - I get back on my feet and have persistent `sources.lists.d`, if I enable the feature again.
   >
   > So, [[!tails_gitweb_commit 33eeda92533]] will break the Additional
   > Software of everybody unless we integrate the new binding automatically.

1. Persist additional software repositories and Podman containers.

   Edit `persistence.conf`.

       gnome-text-editor admin:///live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/persistence.conf

   Persist additional repositories.

       /etc/apt/sources.list.d	source=apt-sources.list.d,link

   Persist Podman containers, the containerization technology used by *Dangerzone*

       /home/amnesia/.local/share/containers	source=podman

1. Add *Dangerzone* repo.

       sudo cp /usr/share/doc/tails/website/doc/persistent_storage/additional_software/dangerzone/dangerzone.sources /live/persistence/TailsData_unlocked/apt/sources/

   <div class="caution">

   <p>We include this sources file in Tails for convenience, but installing
   <i>Dangerzone</i> relies on the APT repository hosted by <a
   href="https://freedom.press/">Freedom of the Press Foundation</a>.
   As a consequence:</p>

   <ul>
   <li>You need to trust the packages from this repository not to break the
   security of your Tails.</li>
   <li><i>Dangerzone</i> might stop working in Tails outside of the control of
   the Tails team.</li>
   </ul>

   </div>

1. Restart Tails.

1. When starting Tails, [[set up an administration password|doc/first_steps/welcome_screen/administration_password]].

1. Install.

       sudo apt update

       sudo apt install dangerzone fuse-overlayfs

1. Add to Additional Software from notification.

1. Do a first run from the command line.

       dangerzone

1. Do the following runs from **Applications&nbsp;▸ Office&nbsp;▸ Dangerzone**.
